# A Tutorial on Stochastic Bandits, with Applications to the Management of Electricity Consumption

*June, 22 2026 -- École d’été d’analyse numérique 2026 -- CEA, Inria, EDF*

### Gilles Stoltz & Margaux Brégère

Stochastic Bandits form a simple case of online learning, where at each round, a learner must select an action and obtains and observes a stochastic reward depending on this action, but does not observe the rewards that would have been achieved with other actions available. The rewards are generated according to some unknown stochastic model. The goal of the learner is to maximize the cumulative reward or, equivalently, minimize a quantity called the regret, defined as the difference between the cumulative reward achieved by the best action and the cumulative reward actually achieved.

1.  The first part of this series of lectures is devoted to vanilla **K-armed bandits**, which correspond to facing K actions, each associated with a fixed but unknown distribution. We review simple strategies like ETC (explore then commit) and UCB (upper confiance bound): we formally define them, state regret bounds, and provide proofs thereof. The UCB strategy (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, Fisher, 2002) is an optimistic strategy building upper confidence bounds on the expectations of the distributions associated with arms and picking at each round the action associated with the largest such upper confidence bound. Thompson sampling (Thompson, 1933; Chapelle and Li, 2011; Scott, 2010), a Bayesian-sampling-based strategy will also be studied, if time permits. The Jupyter notebook `multi_armed_bandits.ipynb` of the present repository illustrates this introduction: ETC, UCB and TS are implemented for the 'Bernoulli' multi-armed bandit problem

2.  The second part considers an extension where actions lie in a continuous set, typically a subset of , and where rewards are, in expectation, linear functions of the actions picked. We review **the classic LinUCB strategy** (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pal, Szepesvari, 2011), which builds sequentially confidence regions over the unknown linear parameter of the reward function, from which it derives confidence regions over rewards functions. The actions are again picked in an optimitic fashion, by focusing on the largest values compatible with the confidence regions. We will finally explain how finite-armed contextual bandits, where rewards depend on a (possibly continuous) context and on the arm picked in a finite set, may be handled in a similar way. In the notebook `load_reduction_linear_bandits.ipynb`, a toy scenario consisting in a demand response aggregator (DRA) selling load reductions on short-term electricity markets is proposed to implement and test LinUCB.

3.  The third and final part presents **an adaption of the linear setting designed to manage the electricity consumption** by sending tariff incentives to customers (Bregere, Gaillard, Goude, Stoltz, 2019). This setting corresponds to contextual bandits with finitely many actions given by tariff levels, but where instead of picking one tariff the learner rather picks shares of the population receiving each tariff level. Imposing higher tariffs reduces the consumption and offering lower tariffs increases it. We consider electrical demand data (gathered by UK Power Networks and available in the repos: `electrical_demand_data.csv`) in which price incentives were offered to design a stochastic bandit algorithm for demand side management in `target_tracking_bandits.ipynb`.
